 Get the point. Then because starting, I need to ask some few questions from you. It's okay.  Right. The first thing is what about your knowledge on these things? Regular expression.  Have you done regular expression earlier?  Any idea?  Under the automata, you have done some regular expression. Okay. Then I'll give some ref idea.  Then continue because I assume that because you are normally busy. I still don't know. Right.  Then finance state automation. That part also may be governing. Okay.  Okay. Then I'll assume that you have some brief idea on automata and regular expression and  finance state one. Right. Then other things I can conduct to the class. Right. Okay. Right.  There are three reference books mentioned in here. That is one is a very famous one speech and  language forcing. Then the other one is statistical natural language forcing and other one is  introduction to natural language forcing. You can download it all. I can give these  reference to you. Right. Then I give this one. Then you can easily download without any issues.  These are the references. Right. If you need, you can download it from chat.  Okay. These are additional reading. Not much. Right. Okay. Please take those things. I think I'll send it  to the only one person. Sorry for that. I'll send it to all again.  Okay. Right. Now, let's start it. Right.  Okay. Today, I give you some brief idea on natural language forcing. Right. Okay.  Now, I asked some small question. This is a normal class. Okay. Then in a normal class,  we are not talking anything and nature, everything and we are listening to everything. That's  normal behavior. But I hope that you need to do different things. Right. If you have any questions,  please use chat and ask that question as you raised that. Okay. Then you know that you have  some issues or questions. Then I can do different things. One is directly can tell everything  it's record or otherwise, I can support to the chat. Okay. And also, sometimes I ask some questions.  Basically, yes, no question. Kind of things. On that time, you should need to answer at least  yes or no. Otherwise, I don't know if you are in the class or no. Right. Sometimes you can do some  others, whatever you are in the online. Right. Okay. Right. My first, not question.  Where are you seeing natural language forcing? Before that, these are the course details. Right.  Normally, it's say that you have 30% assignment time, 70% final examinations. Right. Before that,  I'll directly move to this image. Now, what we can see through this image?  Any idea? Actually, you know that we can say like this. You are doing AI, you know. Right. Tell me,  in AI, there are two branches. Tell me those two branches now.  Normally, generally, we're talking about, it can be different, talking about in different  different ways and other things. But normally, now, there are two branches. There are most  popular ones. It's generative here. You know that. Right. I know that you are now 30 years and you know  everything on that. Right. But you think on that, especially natural language processing. Right.  A lot of applications are now available through that area. Okay.  Especially, you think on that every day, we use CHGTP and so many other applications,  online. It's been that in AI, 30 or 40% is in it. But that's true there.  The earthquake at the airport. Right.  Right. If it is, you agree for that, then give a message. So, no. Then I know that you are in the class.  Okay.  Right. Then what you've taken? What is the idea? Now, normally, in AI,  32% now natural language processing. Then, actually, what is natural language processing? Any idea?  Can anyone tell that answer? What is natural language processing?  Because on the general AI, we discuss the real fight on NINELP. Normally, under the AI,  we discuss about the ice air sub-area of AI that is NINELP. Right. Now, I ask small question,  what is actually NINELP? What is that? Why it is sub-area of AI? Any answer?  Any answer?  Please try to give some answer. This method is a correct or wrong, right? Okay.  Then, at least, you can type it now, right? You try to give some answer, what I ask. Otherwise,  it's not good, no? Okay. Tell me what is NINELP?  A field of artificial intelligence and enable computers to understand,  interpret, send, generate human language in both texts and speech.  I assume that it's not generated by AI tool, right? Okay. Good. Short answer.  NINELP is a deal with human languages in any way. Okay.  Come with us to understand and generate human language, text, and speech. Okay.  Any idea?  Sorry, but then, I think that I said it drops. Oh, man.  Network in sub-area, right? Sorry for that.  Shalasha, it again.  Okay. We are talking about natural language first thing, right? Then why we are in natural language first thing?  I mean, we are a deal with natural languages, right? There are two parts, analysis and  generation kind of thing later we discuss, right? Then that is the basic idea.  Now, you can see that why it is more important in AI? Can anyone say that?  I.E. AI will make a bad idea. Anyone can say.  Think and answer.  Why it is very important in AI?  Okay. Any idea?  Oh, well, I don't want to get any guy in on it.  Yes, yes, no.  A human communicate with the language, so I need to be able to understand that.  Not that much of the right thing in easy way. Now, basic idea is like this, right?  Then in a word, only humans are the people use language like that kind of written language to communicate.  You take any other animals, right? They have different communication mechanism. That's okay, right?  You don't know something, right? It's still we don't know how then we normally know that  like a penguin, you know, some kind of dolphin kind of animals, normally they are communicate each other  in some way, you know, some kind of their voice, right? But it's not like humans know.  The normally humans as, you know, that more than 1000 of languages in the world, right?  They are singing, they are doing stories, writing something, and a lot of things are there.  Then it's mean that language ability and communication ability is the main part of the intelligence.  Then I think you understand, right? The main part of the intelligence language communication.  They are poor. We use that ability or give that facilities to the machine.  It's very important. That is the main part of it, right? This is why it's important, okay?  Then when you get on day-to-day applications, there are many applications you can see through the  needle, right? Look out on that, right? The first one in this diagram you can see,  jaggy TV is there, right? Then I asked a small one is, in LB application, no LLM application,  large-langual model application, which one? What is jaggy TV?  Any idea?  My simple question is, whether the jaggy TV is NLP applications  or LLM application?  It's NLP application that uses LLM.  Okay, that's good. Actually, in LLM application, why? It's a childhood.  It's a child system, right? But we think about 20-30 years back, there are a lot of child systems  are there. They have different road-based mechanism and some of them mechanism is there  for generating the answers. Now, the power by using power of generative AI, right? It can generate  whatever it is. That is the beauty of that part and many people like that. That is the story behind  that, okay? Normally, it's a NLP application, understood, right? Clear? Right. Then it's required to  learn more than NLP, no? Right, take that. Okay, then next option. You can see on top right corner,  what is that? You can see that it's a machine transmission system, right? It's a Google Translate.  What is that? Yes,  You need to answer, you need to send message, it's the sim is or you stat and not the sim is you,  use the chat and give the answers, it's required, right? Don't stay like, no any answers, right?  Right, what is a machine transmission? It's also a NLP application, right? It's  translate, one takes into other language. For example, in this screen, you can see that it's  translate, English takes into the single. It's also a NLP application, understood? Clear?  Right, then go to the right side. What is it? A very famous one I talked about, right? You know  that when you go to write some articles or some rights, right? Then what is this one?  That is called Kilbot, very famous one, right? You know that?  Right? Okay, then here it's used for summarize. I'll give some text, then it can take a summary  example. For the summarization, it can use that Kilbot kind of things and also rewrite the article  in different form, right? Now, you know that many people now use Kilbot,  change it to be kind of tools, right? There are many NLP applications, for example,  another one, some pages, detection tools like many tools are there,  in addition to spread checkers, grammar checkers, right? You can see that in left side top lot of  NLP applications are there on department, right? It's also generated by AI.  This diagram also generated by AI system, right? Now, what is the summary on that?  By looking on that, natural language forcing is around 50% of AI, right? Then lot of day-to-day  applications are based on NLP and we use those things, right? Then we need to take a lot of  idea on that, right? Right? All clear? Right, now we move quickly, some other one,  what is the summary on this?  Summary on this.  Any idea? As a summary, what is the pilot conclusion?  By looking on all these things, we need to study thoroughly on NLP, right?  Now, there are two reasons, one is you are also AI students, right?  Then you need to thorough idea on natural language possible, right? Clear?  Okay, then you are ready to learn more NLP applications and they are theory and other things,  right? Throughout this module, we will discuss, I think, 60% of theory and 40% of practical things,  okay? I hope to give a lot of practicals and a lot of practical involvement to the NLP,  all right? Okay, we'll give some practicals and some theories as well, okay?  Okay, then as a first step, we need to know about basic on NLP,  that's mean that what is the difference between natural language and computer language?  You all know these things, right? Tell me what is the difference?  Extra idea on natural language and computer language,  okay?  Any idea?  Can anyone tell extract different between natural language and computer language?  Any idea?  I don't know why you are not thinking that much, right? Then you take the idea,  contact the idea in natural language, use for communication and knowledge,  storing and kind of things, right? Then that is the purpose, right?  Computer language, we normally use for communication with computers.  The main difference is in computer language, there is no ambiguous, right?  There are no ambiguity, right? But in natural language, a lot of annuity is idea,  that is the main difference on both languages, okay? At the point,  now I'll take some example, for example, I tell you, I till like this, right?  Then if you are not a answer, right? I'll flash a red light for you.  And you know that flash red light mean is some kind of idiomatic ideas, right?  Then that is the mean, right? You can see that it should have different, different meaning,  right? Then that is the issues on not issues, right?  That is the beauty of natural languages, understood?  For example, you know that so many stories, so many things are there on that  ambiguity kind of things, there's a very famous story on that is in earlier,  that is 2,000 years back writing that story on Kiyani in singular, we can say that,  right? I used to, right? You think on that, right? That is the beauty of natural language,  but if you look at on computer languages, they are very strict, right? I ask,  what about your language knowledge? Any ideas? You have some good knowledge on Python?  Now, tell me yes or no? At least, yes. Okay, thank you. I did I assume that all of you have  that knowledge, right? Then, you know, tell me exactly what you have in a programming language,  where you can have a freedom to use any name or something.  Yes, yes, only two things, variable names or some kind of object names, right? Class,  name, or something, that's only, but it should have also some  restrictions, that's only, you know, you can't do any other things in a programming language  then it's intense. So, it has the second and the rhythm, this is how they develop a language  without ambiguity, ambiguity and it should have different name, right? You can pronounce it so,  you can take the idea on different way, that is the idea, okay? Clear, I think you take the idea on this,  right? Then, again, we take the summary on that, ambiguity is the primary difference between  natural and computer languages, right? Ambiguity occurs when word or phrase or sentence has multiple  meaning, making interpretation until, right? That is the idea. Then, if you look at on  formal programming languages, are designed to be unambiguous, right? This is why easily,  compilers can understand those things, if compilers are not understand correctly, right? Then what  happened? Yes, I think it's not possible to programming or software or anything, understood that,  not the software, they need the nanny computers, compilers, and then everything, okay?  All right, then next point, now we look at on, really, what is natural and impossible?  Yes, the idea on that, in natural language, processing is a field of AI,  that's enable machine to understand, interpret and generate human language, it's  spring gap between human communication and computer understanding, okay?  And in general, nanny has a two part, one is understanding and other part is generation.  Then you can see that, then how it happened, right? That's called pipeline.  In general pipeline, you can see that, right? Natural languages are there,  we computers can understand those natural languages.  Then, compilers have some format of natural languages,  then, it should require to regenerate as it is, like it's in that time in natural language.  Okay, at the point, I can show you a famous one, I think,  this is not a new one, right? It's a very old one, I think, this kind of,  nanny, one minute, I'll show you some video for you, right? And normally,  probably, I can show that this kind of video, more for you, right?  All right, you look at on this one, it can take these are very old video, right? Not a much.  But you can see the idea between itself,  right?  Right, I assume that under the AI modules, you can see those kind of videos lot, okay?  Sorry, you have already seen these kind of videos, no? Yes or no?  Yes, actually, you've seen these kind of videos, no, it's a very famous one, no?  Now, think on that, that kind of things about what is there, right? Human is there on other side,  then human can ask directly question from the robot, then what happens, then robot can ask, okay?  Right, then what is that involvement?  Through, by considering the natural language for the concept, what is that involvement?  You take a one scenario, right? Once, humans ask some question,  then it's use natural languages, right? Then robot is a kind of computer, no?  Then computers hear that voice, and then process it and take the idea and take the generate  the answer or something from that, by searching some of this, some of that, then you should have  ability to regenerate the human voice, understood that? Somehow it regenerates, right?  Then that is the process of natural language for the concept, understand natural language,  and then what happens? Oh, understand the natural language, then generate the natural language,  text, clear? Now, you get the point,  here, there, there, another, right? Okay, thank you. Now, that is the idea, right?  In NLT, what we can do? Normally, there are two parts, one is natural language, there,  right? Then machines can understand that, that is the one part, right? The second part is,  machine can generate that one, okay? It's mean that a machine can generate a natural language.  I'll show you some other good video, one minute actually.  Actually, this is not a now, right? Now, what is the generative way I need that?  AI can generate something, no? That means that productivity, right? Production ability is given.  Then value is changed, right? But earlier, it's mean that before 2020 kind of things, right?  Then those are some kind of only dreams. Now, this is that kind of video, right?  Right? It's an interesting one. Earlier, not now, but  right?  Right, I also assume that you have see that kind of video earlier, right? Now, there is the,  not now, I think, 20, you know, 10 years, that kind of thing, there are one chatbot directly  communicate with the other chat, right? That is the first attempt to communicate with machines,  machines, not actually the first attempt, but some recorders or records are there on chatbot  to chatbot communication, right? It's an interesting point, right? Before generative AI is come on,  right? Then you can see that chatbots kind of things can communicate with more quickly and more  differently, right? For that, it's recorded some kind of natural languages and other things,  okay? Now, you can see it's an interesting idea, okay? It's a very interesting idea.  What we discussed under the NLP, we discuss, right? Natural understanding, language understanding  is a one part and natural language generation is another part, okay? It's mean that you can think  that machines can understand what humans is, that is the one part. Another part is,  machine can directly communicate with the humans through the natural language,  it's mean that now it's happening, right? Machine can directly give a way to people, right?  Now normally, you know that there is a tool called Texas speech tool, then you can see that  there are tools available on normally charge it to be a text tool, but we can enable that into  the voice tool, then whatever, you can communicate with that, check it through the voice,  understood that? It's interesting, people more like, you know, that the recent story,  there is one scientist there, there's a story I have seen on the internet, right? That  say that, that person done that one because of charge it to be kind of things,  okay? Then it's very famous now, right? Okay, then I asked some very simple question now,  can machine understand human language? What is your answer?  In AI, there are two theories now, you know that earlier, early days, not now,  early days, two tests are there now, I think the professor normally tells you those things,  right? You got that theory in test and Chinese rumour, even kind of things,  how do you know? You can't tell anything, yes, I know that, right? Then, then tell me,  according to the Chinese rumour, what we can see? Early argument, you know,  yes, these are the interviews, okay? According to the theories, what other?  Think on it, right? Right? Now, what is the answer? Can machine understand human language?  Hmm? Not a good idea, that is made up of the kind of information,  in this class, I think there are 46 students, what is it without two, three, at least,  45 students are there now? The 90 dance, at least 30.  I think the answer is correct,  Yes?  No, no, no. Can't know part.  Wow, it's a good idea.  Right. Right. The idea. Machine. Do not understand human language. In the same way human.  Thank you. That is the book. But it can understand it. Some people. You know, let I tell you how humans  understand that. Right. But I think on that machines can understand human language are in  a different way. Okay. Then machine, process and generate language using statistical models. So I do  the train on large data set. I know different mechanism. Sometimes it's on rules. Right.  Other. For example, in other way, natural language forcing and large language forms like  judge it, we can recognize pattern, right, infamyening and generate conceptual relations.  Cut the things, right. But the idea here, they are understanding is based on  learn, associate, other than the genuine cognitive illness. There is a different story, right.  How human understand the language and how machine understand the language. For example,  you think on that once we heard something, right. You can take a lot of idea.  You are singing.  You can. But still machine doesn't have such a thing.  And this would that. The machine understood it well. But I don't know how much it  can take that the signal at time. But it cannot take it like us. Okay. Later, that can be  happen. What is the meaning of that? Then final answer. Can machine  understand the human language? What is the idea? Right. Machine understand human language in some other way.  Right. We can't say it's not understand. It's understand on some other way.  What then the how human understanding?  Right. Now it's question. Why is study in it?  Why is study in it?  Okay. What is idea? That's why today we start. Right. The natural language is just a mark of  human image. That's why in first I tell you. Then nowadays takes and videos are allowed  at the spirit of human knowledge. You know that now technology is fast, then what happens?  It's more to the text too. Image is then more to the video. I will know that. Just one question.  Have a right. Have a right to read the text or see the image or see the video.  This is one answer. Simply send the reason. See the video.  That is the idea. Now, early days, there is a text. Now then move to the text to image.  Then early days, small images. Right. You know that in our childhood, there are image like  very famous one. Right. We take in our three eight hits computer. Right. In 2000 or something. Right.  It's take a few seconds to launch the image. Those days where it came as films, images are there. Right.  We take these everything in one or two minutes, seconds to launch their images.  Understand that. Text images, then high quality images, then move to the videos.  Now it's go to the high resolution videos and late times go to the 3D kind of thing.  That is the idea. Okay. But the idea here, you text and video or things is a lot  represented now. You know that now information or flow is there in the world.  Just example how many emails you receive today, but hey, how many news articles are there in Sri Lanka?  How many newspapers are there? Do you have time to read all these newspapers?  I do know. Yes, one question, right. Have you finished by reading your Facebook account?  Yes, I have finished by reading your Facebook account.  Yes, one. Take a one hour.  Answer is simple. No, why? As in that you have 500 strings.  They applaud one video, boop, pose, or share something within a day.  Then you need to see 500 ones.  They run it. That is the beauty of those things. Because of that,  there are a lot of natural language, acknowledgement, in the technology now.  That is the last center. We are reading and listening, right.  And seeing parts of the end before.  Because we have a lot of ideas. We have a lot of documents. We have a lot of materials now.  Right. That we as some time you don't have much time.  Then what happened? You need more technical support. For example, right.  Now there are some tools now available to summarize the news articles.  I think many people like that. Then the listening morning, whatever,  talk to them at the end of the day. Sometimes there are no heroes or something.  They are just a political news study, right.  Then there are many people like to listen actual news within 10 or 5 or 10 minutes, right.  Then they are to call a news article summarization to.  News summarization.  Then that's mean that the NLPs has no informant than the people.  Okay. Then until that what I say, it is very important to study NL.  In a category, right. That's not only. Now you know that there is article summarization,  there is chat board, there is a machine translation tool, there is a  cheekboard type article summarization, kind of lot of tools are there.  I mean all these tools are nice and sweet, right. This is okay.  You know, we not finish on that.  We need to develop as a utilize. You need to develop that kind of more comprehensive tools.  Understood that. For example, I can say that still there is no proper grammar checker bo single.  Can anyone say that is proper grammar checker is available.  Spell checker is available. Re1 bo single.  Very famous one.  Anyway, but some time you can see there are some tools like  text speech, can not, speech text can not as are there like  hella kuru samti, that kind of tools are there.  But still grammar checkers, spell checkers and kind of tools are not there.  For the local languages, okay.  But in English language, a lot of things are there, right. It's not all language now.  But in single kind of things, there's no such thing.  Okay, then what we final objective of this study in this kind of module,  right. You take the clear idea on pertardic physical, pertardic system technology,  it's on natural language policy under the area of an health, okay.  Then you can apply those tools techniques  for your project, finally project some assignment or something, right.  For example, they take a match value for you, right.  And assume that what I say, right, that is the main objective on that,  okay. Right, with this point, today I'll conclude this class, right.  So that's because I need to attend a meeting at 10, right.  Then today I can conclude this one now.  Then we meet on next Friday, coming Friday.  I think that is the holiday, but you can join, right. 6.930.  Then we will discuss more in a few on that day, okay.  Clear.  Any questions?  If not, then you go to my blog, right.  I'll send that links for you.  Then you go to teaching under teaching there is a natural language.  First thing is there, right.  Some notes are there here, right.  You can take these.  I will add additional note for you for your module here, right.  This is a general NLP module, right.  But one is it  more theoretical and this one, right.  Okay.  Right, you go to this one and take some idea and come back to the class on next day, okay.  Right. Any questions?  Right.  If not, if we could take some attendance today, please type your index number and  add it into the chat.  Then I'll take that as a record.  Please type your index number or something into chat, right. 